Cansat Design and Construction Guide

Table of Contents
1.0 Introduction
1.1 Rocket Flight Dynamics and Variabilities
2.0 Parachutes and Attachments
2.1 Parachutes
2.2 Attachment Points
3.0 Mounting Electronics
4.0 Materials Selection
5.0 Electrical Connections
6.0 Battery Mounts
7.0 Antennas

3
3
4
4
4
5
6
6
7
7

7.1 Payload Antennas
7.2 Ground Station Antennas
8.0 3D Printed Parts

7
7
8

1.0 Introduction
This guide is to help you design and build a CanSat that will have a much better chance of surviving
launch, deployment, and landing. This guide is based on years of kit designing and prototyping.

​

1.1 Rocket Flight Dynamics and Variabilities

No rocket flight is identical. Each flight will vary, sometimes substantially. There are many variables
involved. Starting with the rocket motor, manufacturers can have up to +/-10% propellant performance
variation. This means the peak altitude can vary due to variation in propellant performance variation.
The next variable is the delay grain used to deploy the rocket parachute and CanSat. It too can vary in
its timing. Deployment can vary up to a second early or late. The black powder used to pressurize the
booster section of the rocket to deploy the parachute can vary in quantity which will vary the amount of
force exerted on the payload section. The manufacturer includes a small amount of black powder. An
additional amount is added to make sure the payload section properly separates from the booster
section since the manufacturer's amount is not enough.
Then there is the weather. Humidity has some effect. Winds have a greater effect. The center of gravity
of the CanSat also has an effect. These variations will affect the flight path of the rocket. With a low
center of gravity of the CanSat, the rocket will tend to fly more vertical even with moderate winds.
With higher upper winds, the rocket will tend to turn into the winds reducing peak altitude and adding
more horizontal velocity. Some flights may lose a lot of altitude.

2.0 Parachutes and Attachments
When the CanSat is deployed from the rocket, it is possible the rocket is still moving quickly. The
container parachute will open up almost immediately after the CanSat exits the payload section and
open up. There will be a significant jerk force on the parachute and the attachment point.

​

2.1 Parachutes

It is best to purchase a commercial parachute. It is simpler and a time saver. There are multiple sources
and multiple designs. There are designs specific for high velocity deployments. If you must make your
own parachute, use a strong cord and have the cord sewed into the parachute material. High
performance parachutes secure the cord across the parachute. A major weak point is the attachment
point of the cord and parachute material. Do not use fish line.
There are numerous types of parachutes, the simplest is a the flat circular sheet, then there is spherical
parachute. The problem with these parachutes is they fill with air and will tilt to the side to spill out air.
It is highly recommended to get a parachute with a spill hole. An x-form parachute will also work.
Also include a one to 2 foot length of cord between the parachute and CanSat. The length of cord will
dampen any swaying from the parachute to the CanSat. I use kelvar cord and a knot that tightens when
pulling the cord. There are numerous websites and a book on knots.
For parachute material, use ripstop nylon. Do not use Quest or Estes plastic parachutes.

​

2.2 Attachment Points

The best way to attach is an eye-bolt. The bent wire eye-bolt with an 8-32 threading is sufficient. A
forged eye-bolt is better but most likely overkill. You want the attachment point to be very strong. Use
a fender washer on both sides of the eye-bolt when securing with a nut. The fender washer distributes
the load over a larger portion of the material. This configuration is used in the construction of the
rockets. Where the eye-bolt attaches to the CanSat structure is important. Make sure the material is
strong enough. 1/8 inch thick micro-plywood is strong. Some printed plastics may not have the
strength. Testing needs to be performed to verify the strength.
If using a bent wire eye-bolt, make sure the cord cannot slip through any gap.

3.0 Mounting Electronics
Electronics need to be properly mounted. If designing circuit boards, include mounting holes. 0.125
inch or 3 mm mounting holes are sufficient to support 4-40 threaded hardware or M2.56 metric
hardware. It is best to have four mounting holes in the corners of the board. When designing the board,
make sure there is sufficient room around the mounting hole for the screw head or nut. ¼ inch or 6.4
mm diameter clearance should suffice. You don't want the screw head or nut short against a trace or
come in contact with a component. I usually have a larger clearance to allow space for a nut driver to
be used.
There are two mounting methods that work. One uses double
sided foam carpet tape. This is used only on small circuit
boards that do not have mounting holes such as sensor
boards. Larger circuit boards should use hard screw
mounting.
The second mounting method is with screws. 4-40 hardware
or M2.56 hardware is sufficient for circuit boards. Circuit
boards need some bottom clearance. Standoffs are used to
provide the clearance. For the most part, nuts can be used as
standoffs. This saves some cost and is very effective.
Pictured to the right is a metal plate with ½ inch long 4-40
screws inserted from the bottom and secured with kep-nuts.
Kep-nuts are nuts with a toothed washer attached. The
toothed washer keeps the nut from loosening.
The picture below shows a circuit board installed on the screws
and secured in place with standoffs. The Standoffs will be used
to mount another circuit board on top.
Standoffs can be used to stack same sized circuit boards. The
circuit boards are secured between the standoffs. Use standoffs
with a male and female end. 4-40 standoffs with a 3/16”
diameter is sufficient. Pictured are aluminum standoffs which
are very light and low cost.
Be careful with aluminum
standoffs and other
aluminum hardware. The
thread side can be broken
off if tightened too much.
An added measure of keeping the nuts and screws from loosening
is to add a small amount of epoxy or hot glue on the thread side or
across the screw head and part of the structure or circuit board. The
epoxy or hot glue keeps the nut or screw from loosening during
flight. I have never really needed to do that for one Launch. Over
multiple launches, it is possible for the nuts and screws to loosen.

4.0 Materials Selection
Be careful with selecting materials. Two issues are materials strength and
temperature. The CanSat can be in the rocket for a while in the sun and get
warmed. Temperatures in the upper 30C have been recorded. If printing
components with a 3D printer or using plastics, test in a thermal chamber
for warping and softening.

5.0 Electrical Connections
When interconnecting boards, do not solder wires between boards. Wires
will break at the solder joints. If you must solder wires directly, secure the
wire at the solder joint with hot glue or epoxy. You want to make it so the
wire at the solder joint cannot move.
Use stranded wires. Solid core wires are not designed for movement and
will break over time due to bending and vibrations. If the solid wire is
nicked when stripping the insulation, the nick will become the weak point
and eventually break.
Connectors are preferable for connecting signals between boards. Low cost
connectors such as the Molex stackable housing connector with a .1 inch
grid spacing. The one shown to the right is part number 0050579003. They
mate with .1 inch headers. They do require a crimp tool and this series uses a
relatively low cost hand crimp tool. 0640160201.
There are connector kits for different series types of connectors such as
PH2.0 or MX connectors. Kits will include both mating connectors with
different pin counts and pre-crimped wires.
You can also use board-to-board connectors. This allows for stacking boards
together. Make sure to use standoffs or spacers so the board-to-board
connectors are not stressed when boards are mounted to each other. With
these connectors, you want to pick connectors that have a large tolerance to
handle movement relative to each other without disconnecting.
When making connections, a small amount of hot glue, epoxy, or electrical
grade RTV can be used to make sure the connector does not come loose. A
small dot of RTV or glue that spans across the connector and base of the
header is all that is needed. There are some connectors that include an
interlock.
If using connectors that require soldering wires to pins or sockets, some
sort of strain relief will be required. You want to avoid the wire at the
solder joint from moving since that will start causing fractures in the
solder and eventually break the wire.
Another important tool is the wire stripper. It is preferable to use a wire
stripper with preset wire gauge notches instead of the cheap one that uses a
set screw to set the wire size. A good wire stripper will remove the wire
insulation without nicking the metal. When a wire gets a nick, that
becomes the weak point and will break after being bent or flexed for a while. Good wire cutters do not

have to cost a lot.

6.0 Battery Mounts
During flight, the payload will experience vibrations and shocks. Batteries are relatively heavy and can
easily move. if using Alkaline 9V batteries, use Duracell. The internal cells in the 9V battery are
welded. Other brands use some type of spring. Vibrations and shock can cause disconnects.
If using circular cells, do not use battery holders with springs for contacts. Again, the vibrations and
shock forces can cause disconnects. Use prefabricated battery packs or get batteries with tabs and make
soldered connections. Secure any wires with tape to keep the wires from moving. Cover all connections
with tape or other insulating materials to avoid shorts.
Secure the battery to the structure well and in all dimensions. Zip ties work well as a low cost method.
They can be installed across the battery in both dimensions. Small 9V batteries can have one zip tie and
then tape wrapped around to keep the battery from sliding out from the zip tie.

7.0 Antennas
Antenna selection and operation can make or break a radio link. By the time a data packet reaches your
ground station from the cansat, it will be several million times weaker than when it was transmitted.
Your antennas will give the radio signal power a boost, and so to maintain a continuous radio link with
your payload, careful attention must be given to the antennas used on ground and in flight.

​

7.1 Payload Antennas

Radio waves are bent and bounced by metal: this makes antennas work, but can also cause them to fail!
In general, it is best practice to keep antennas as far as possible from metallic materials which are not
part of the antenna itself. The size of your cansat payload makes this a challenge, but best results will
still be seen when the antenna has a clear “path” to the air, meaning there is little to no metal between
the antenna and the sky. Plastic, fabric, and other non-metallic materials will not affect the antenna’s
operation. It is recommended that you do not bury your antenna deep inside your payload where it will
be surrounded by metal components.
Whip or wire antennas are commonly used for the XBEE transmitter module. These are reliable
radiators, but they can be less effective when bent at the wrong angle. They typically work best when
oriented perpendicular to the radio module. Experiment with the best orientation for your antenna, but
be careful not to break it: it is just a flexible wire after all.

​

7.2 Ground Station Antennas

Your ground station antenna will do most of the work needed to maintain a radio link with your
payload since it will likely have the highest gain in your communication system. There are countless
possible antennas to choose from, each with their own pros and cons.
It is important to think about
the trade between high gain
and how fast you need to
steer the antenna to keep up
with your payload.
Antennas, such as yagis,
with very high gain (a
narrow main beam) must be

moved quickly to keep the payload within the main beam. Likewise, it
may be possible to steer an antenna more slowly if it has low gain (a wider
main beam), like a monopole or dipole, but the received signal will be
weaker. Teams in the past have achieved good communication links using
both directive and omni-directional antennas.
Polarization of your antenna can play a role in communication
maintenance as well. Best practice is to have the payload and ground
station antennas be of similar polarization. When tumbling, the
polarization of the payload antenna may change rapidly and could disrupt
your radio link. To compensate for this, you might consider exploring
dual-polarized or circular-polarized ground station antennas.
Examples include dual-polarized yagi antennas, helical monopoles,
and parabolic, or dish, antennas with circular feeds.

8.0 3D Printed Parts
3D printing allows for complex shaped parts to be easily fabricated.
Be careful of how the parts are used. In some directions, the parts may
not be strong enough for shock forces. The parts do well with
compressive forces but tension forces can cause layer separation or other failures. For parachute
attachment points, it is highly recommended to use a solid material such as plywood, polycarbonate,
fiberglass or similar solid material. 3D printed parts may not stay intact with a shock force pulling at
one point. It is recommended that solid materials be used where high forces are expected and 3D
printed parts be attached to the solid materials and used where low forces will be experienced.
Select light colors for any 3D printed parts that may be exposed to the sun for any duration to avoid
weakening of any printed structures. White and bright orange are good colors that have been tested.
Some filament materials tested include PLA+ from Inland, PETG and ABS. Be careful with printing
large sized components. All plastic filaments do shrink some and it varies based on manufacturer as
each has their own filament formula.

